NAC is a technology that is designed to interrogate endpoints before joining a wired or wireless network. It is typically used in conjunction with 802.1X for identity management and enforcement. In short, a network access switch or wireless access point (AP) can be configured to authenticate end users and perform a security posture assessment of the endpoint device to enforce policy. For example, it can check whether you have security software such as antivirus, anti-malware, and personal firewalls before it allows you to join the network. It can also check whether you have a specific version of an operating system (for example, Microsoft Windows, Linux, or macOS) and whether your system has been patched for specific vulnerabilities.

In addition, NAC-enabled devices (switches, wireless APs, and so on) can use several detection techniques to detect the endpoint trying to connect to the network. A NAC-enabled device intercepts DHCP requests from endpoints. A broadcast listener is used to look for network traffic, such as ARP requests and DHCP requests generated by endpoints.

Several NAC solutions use client-based agents to perform endpoint security posture assessments to prevent an endpoint from joining the network until it is evaluated. In addition, some switches can be configured to send an SNMP trap message when a new MAC address is registered with a certain switch port and to trigger the NAC process.

NAC implementations can allow specific nodes such as printers, IP phones, and video conferencing equipment to join the network by using an allow list (or whitelist) of MAC addresses corresponding to such devices. This process is known as _MAC authentication (auth) bypass_. MAC auth bypass is a feature of NAC. The network administrator can preconfigure or manually change these access levels. For example, a device accessing a specific VLAN (for example, VLAN 88) must be manually predefined for a specific port by an administrator, making deploying a dynamic network policy across multiple ports using port security extremely difficult to maintain.

An attacker could easily spoof an authorized MAC address (in a process called _MAC address spoofing_ ) and bypass a NAC configuration. For example, it is possible to spoof the MAC address of an IP phone and use it to connect to a network. This is because a port for which MAC auth bypass is enabled can be dynamically enabled or disabled based on the MAC address of the device that connects to it.